docs/licensing/index.md, before:

# Licensing and citation

- The Jelly [Protocol Buffers and gRPC definitions](https://github.com/Jelly-RDF/jelly-protobuf) are licensed under the [Apache License 2.0](https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0).
- The documentation of Jelly (this website) is licensed under the [Creative Commons Attribution 4.0](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/) license.
- The [Jelly-JVM implementation]({{ jvm_link()}}) is licensed under the [Apache License 2.0](https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0).
- The [pyjelly implementation]({{ python_link()}}) is licensed under the [Apache License 2.0](https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0).
- The [`jelly-cli`](https://github.com/Jelly-RDF/cli) command-line tool is licensed under the [Apache License 2.0](https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0).

## Jelly maintainer

The entire Jelly tool stack is currently maintained by [NeverBlink](https://neverblink.eu).

The Jelly protocol and Jelly-JVM were originally created by [Piotr Sowiński](https://ostrzyciel.eu) ([GitHub](https://github.com/Ostrzyciel)).

## Attribution / citation

If you use Jelly in your research, please cite [the most recent paper about it](https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2506.11298):

Sowiński, P., Bogacka, K., Danilenka, A., Kozlov, N. (2025). Jelly: a Fast and Convenient RDF Serialization Format. In _arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.11298_. Developers Workshop, co-located with SEMANTiCS'25: International Conference on Semantic Systems, September 3-5, 2025, Vienna, Austria. DOI: [10.48550/arXiv.2506.11298](https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2506.11298)

Or use this BibTeX entry:

```bibtex
@article{sowinski2025jelly,
  title = {Jelly: a Fast and Convenient RDF Serialization Format},
  author = {Sowi{\'n}ski, Piotr and Bogacka, Karolina and Danilenka, Anastasiya and Kozlov, Nikita},
  journal = {arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.11298},
  note = {Developers Workshop, co-located with SEMANTiCS'25: International Conference on Semantic Systems, September 3-5, 2025, Vienna, Austria},
  year = {2025},
  doi = {10.48550/arXiv.2506.11298},
}
```

If you use **[Jelly-Patch](../specification/patch.md)**, please cite [this paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.23499):

Sowiński, P., Grzymkowski, K., Danilenka, A. (2025). Jelly-Patch: a Fast Format for Recording Changes in RDF Datasets. In _arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.23499_. DOI: [10.48550/arXiv.2507.23499](https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2507.23499)

```bibtex
@article{sowinski2025jellypatch,
  title = {Jelly-Patch: a Fast Format for Recording Changes in RDF Datasets},
  author = {Sowi{\'n}ski, Piotr and Grzymkowski, Kacper and Danilenka, Anastasiya},
  journal = {arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.23499},
  year = {2025},
  doi = {10.48550/arXiv.2507.23499},
}
```

You can also check out an older paper that describes an earlier version of the Jelly protocol: *[Efficient RDF streaming for the edge-cloud continuum](https://doi.org/10.1109/WF-IoT54382.2022.10152225)*.

## See also

- [Contributing to Jelly](../contributing/index.md)
- [Applications using Jelly](../use-cases.md)
- [Projects and funding](projects.md)

Commit message:

Update list of papers
Also updated gitignore, as this was missed in a recent PR.

docs/licensing/index.md, after:

# Licensing and citation

- The Jelly [Protocol Buffers and gRPC definitions](https://github.com/Jelly-RDF/jelly-protobuf) are licensed under the [Apache License 2.0](https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0).
- The documentation of Jelly (this website) is licensed under the [Creative Commons Attribution 4.0](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/) license.
- The [Jelly-JVM implementation]({{ jvm_link()}}) is licensed under the [Apache License 2.0](https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0).
- The [pyjelly implementation]({{ python_link()}}) is licensed under the [Apache License 2.0](https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0).
- The [`jelly-cli`](https://github.com/Jelly-RDF/cli) command-line tool is licensed under the [Apache License 2.0](https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0).

## Jelly maintainer

The entire Jelly tool stack is currently maintained by [NeverBlink](https://neverblink.eu).

The Jelly protocol and Jelly-JVM were originally created by [Piotr Sowiński](https://ostrzyciel.eu) ([GitHub](https://github.com/Ostrzyciel)).

## Attribution / citation

If you use Jelly in your research, please cite [the paper about it](https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2506.11298):

Sowiński, P., Bogacka, K., Danilenka, A., Kozlov, N. (2025). Jelly: a Fast and Convenient RDF Serialization Format. In _arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.11298_. Developers Workshop, co-located with SEMANTiCS'25: International Conference on Semantic Systems, September 3-5, 2025, Vienna, Austria. DOI: [10.48550/arXiv.2506.11298](https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2506.11298)

Or use this BibTeX entry:

```bibtex
@article{sowinski2025jelly,
  title = {Jelly: a Fast and Convenient RDF Serialization Format},
  author = {Sowi{\'n}ski, Piotr and Bogacka, Karolina and Danilenka, Anastasiya and Kozlov, Nikita},
  journal = {arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.11298},
  note = {Developers Workshop, co-located with SEMANTiCS'25: International Conference on Semantic Systems, September 3-5, 2025, Vienna, Austria},
  year = {2025},
  doi = {10.48550/arXiv.2506.11298},
}
```

If you use **[Jelly-Patch](../specification/patch.md)**, please cite [this paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.23499):

Sowiński, P., Grzymkowski, K., Danilenka, A. (2025). Jelly-Patch: a Fast Format for Recording Changes in RDF Datasets. In _arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.23499_. DOI: [10.48550/arXiv.2507.23499](https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2507.23499)

```bibtex
@article{sowinski2025jellypatch,
  title = {Jelly-Patch: a Fast Format for Recording Changes in RDF Datasets},
  author = {Sowi{\'n}ski, Piotr and Grzymkowski, Kacper and Danilenka, Anastasiya},
  journal = {arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.23499},
  year = {2025},
  doi = {10.48550/arXiv.2507.23499},
}
```

## All papers and presentations about Jelly

- Sowiński, P., Grzymkowski, K., & Danilenka, A. (2025). Jelly-Patch: a Fast Format for Recording Changes in RDF Datasets. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.23499, accepted at the 24th International Semantic Web Conference (ISWC) 2025 Posters and Demos, 2–6 November, 2025, Nara, Japan, 2025. DOI: [10.48550/arXiv.2507.23499](https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2507.23499)
- Sowiński, P., Kuhn, T., & Bogacka, K. (2025). Tackling inter-service RDF communication bottlenecks in the Nanopublication network with Jelly. Industry Track presentation at SEMANTiCS 2025, 2–5 September, 2025, Vienna, Austria, 2025.
    - [Slides](https://ostrzyciel.eu/assets/pdf/2025/slides_semantics_industry.pdf)
    - [One-page abstract](https://ostrzyciel.eu/assets/pdf/2025/paper_semantics_industry.pdf)
- Sowiński, P., Bogacka, K., Danilenka, A., Kozlov, N. (2025). Jelly: a Fast and Convenient RDF Serialization Format. In _arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.11298_. Developers Workshop, co-located with SEMANTiCS'25: International Conference on Semantic Systems, September 3-5, 2025, Vienna, Austria. DOI: [10.48550/arXiv.2506.11298](https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2506.11298)
- Sowiński, P., Wasielewska-Michniewska, K., Ganzha, M., & Paprzycki, M. (2022, October). Efficient RDF streaming for the edge-cloud continuum. In 2022 IEEE 8th World Forum on Internet of Things (WF-IoT) (pp. 1-8). IEEE. DOI: [10.1109/WF-IoT54382.2022.10152225](https://doi.org/10.1109/WF-IoT54382.2022.10152225)

## See also

- [Contributing to Jelly](../contributing/index.md)
- [Applications using Jelly](../use-cases.md)
- [Projects and funding](projects.md)
